# 1.2 Economic Systems

There are a bunch of economic systems out there, the most common (and superior) being regulated capitalism! Sorry, North Korea. :us::us::us:

## 3 Economic Questions

To determine the type of economic system:

1. **What** goods and services should be produced? :fried_shrimp:
2. **How** should these goods and services be produced? :ocean::zap:
3. **Who** consumes goods and services? :neckbeard:


## Types of Economic Systems

1. Centrally Planned Economy
2. Free Market Economy
3. Mixed Economy

## Centrally Planned - Communism/Marxism

1. Govenrment owns all the resources.
2. Answers all 3 economic questions.


- Face economic shortages, poor quality foods, unhappy citizens.
- Lack of incentive to work harder.
- Lack of mobility.
- Not maximizing potential of its citizens.
- Low economic output.
- Bottom of GDP lists.
- Hard time predicting preferences.
- More popular in poorer countries. (Mentality: a little bit of something is better than nothing at all, especially when it come to basic needs.)
- High proces, low competition

See also: Karl Marx's communist mainfesto.

> They hate us cuz' they ain't us!
>
> -The Interview

| Positives | Negatives |
| -- | -- |
| Low unemployment | No incentive to work harder |
| Great job security | No incentive to innovate or come up with good ideas |
| Equal income means no extremely poor people | No competition |
|  | Corrupt leaders |
|  | Few invidual freedoms |

> Life is a joy in my town, where everyone's the same!
>
> -Starlight Glimmer

## Examples of Centrally Planned

Cuba, North Korea, Former USSR, annnnd maybe China (not anymore but they're doing a great job pretending!)

## Free Market - Capitalism

1. Little government involvement in economy - Lassiez Faire
3. Individual owns resources
3. Answers all 3 economic questions.


- The opportunity to make **profit** gives people **incentive** to produce items efficently
- Wide variety of goods available
- Competition and self-interest work to **regulate**

## Mixed Economy

A mixture of both command economy and free market, but (usually) heavily leaning towards free market.

## Example of Mixed Economy

USA! USA! USA! (Most of the other countries too but USA is clearly superior! :wink:)

- Smartphones & data plans
- Lower prices, better quality, more product variety
- Resources follow profits

## Invisible Hand

Concept that society's goals will be met as individuals seeking self interest.

- Example: Society wants fuel efficent cars :car:
  - Profit seekers want to product more cars :jp::car::car:
 
**Competition** & **self interest** act as invisible hand that regulates the free market.